---
layout: post
title:  "Generalized dessins — Part 2: connected/regular/clean dessins"
---

$$\require{color}$$
$$\newcommand{\Q}{\mathbb{Q}}$$
$$\newcommand{\C}{\mathbb{C}}$$
$$\newcommand{\Z}{\mathbb{Z}}$$
$$\newcommand{\P}{\mathbb{P}}$$
$$\newcommand{\tbar}{\underline{t}}$$
$$\newcommand{\Qbar}{\overline{\Q}}$$
$$\newcommand{\Gal}{\mathrm{Gal}}$$
$$\newcommand{\Sym}{\mathfrak{S}}$$
$$\newcommand{\card}[1]{\left| #1 \right|}$$
$$\newcommand{\gen}[1]{\left\langle #1 \right\rangle}$$
$$\newcommand{\todo}[1]{\color{red}\textbf{[TODO] #1}}$$
$$\newcommand{\D}{\mathcal{D}}$$
$$\newcommand{\Dess}{\mathfrak{Dessins}}$$
$$\newcommand{\PConf}{\mathrm{PConf}}$$
$$\newcommand{\Isomp}{\mathrm{Isom}^+}$$
$$\newcommand{\piet}{\pi_1^{\text{ét}}}$$

In this blog post, we define and study the notions of connected, regular and clean dessins (dessins were introduced in the previous post).
This post is less "conceptual" than the previous one and mostly consists of technicalities.

In proofs, we use the following property: two hyperedges $$e, e' \in E$$ share the same vertex of color $$i \in \{1,\ldots,n\}$$ if and only if there exists an integer $$k$$ such that $$e' = \sigma_i^k.e$$.

## connected dessins

**Definition (connected):**
A dessin $$(V_i, E, s_i)$$ is *connected* if for all hyperedges $$e, e' \in E$$ there exist hyperedges $$e = e_0, e_1, \ldots, e_r = e' $$ and colors $$i_1, \ldots, i_r \in \{1,\ldots,n\} $$ such that $$s_{i_k}(e_{k-1}) = s_{i_k}(e_k)$$.

Notice that $$e_k = \sigma_{i_k}^{l_k}.e_{k-1}$$ for some integer $$l_k$$, and thus $$e' = \sigma_{i_r}^{l_r} \cdots \sigma_{i_1}^{l_1} . e$$.
This leads to the following proposition:

**Proposition:**
A dessin is connected if and only if its monodromy group acts transitively on the set of its hyperedges.

Since transitive $$F_n$$-sets correspond to connected covers of the $$n$$-punctured Riemann sphere, we have:

**Corollary:**
A dessin is connected if and only if the corresponding cover is connected. (for any choice of configuration/bouquet)

-----

**Proposition:**
The automorphism group of a connected dessin acts freely on the set of its hyperedges.

**Proof:**
Let $$\alpha$$ be an automorphism which fixes a hyperedge $$e \in E$$.
Our goal is to show that $$\alpha$$ is the identity morphism.
Consider a hyperedge $$e' \in E$$.
By connexity, there is an element $$g$$ of the monodromy group such that $$e' = g.e$$.
We have $$\alpha(e') = \alpha(g.e) = g.\alpha(e) = g.e = e' $$.
So $$\alpha$$ fixes every hyperedge.
Since every vertex $$v \in V_i$$ can be retrieved as the vertex of the vertex of color $$i$$ of some hyperedge and morphisms preserve colors, $$\alpha$$ also fixes every vertex.
We have showed that $$\alpha$$ is the trivial automorphism. ■

## regular dessins

The notion of regularity for graphs is a model of *homogeneity*, of *sameness of every part*, i.e. it tends to ensure the existence of many automorphisms.
We define a similar notion for dessins:

**Definition:**
A dessin is *regular* if its automorphism group acts transitively on the set of its hyperedges.

Typically, the degree of a vertex of a regular dessin depends only on its color.

#### properties of regular dessins

In terms of covers, regularity is a well-known property:

**Proposition:**
A dessin is regular if and only if the corresponding cover is Galois. (for any choice of configuration/bouquet)

-----

**Proposition:**
The automorphism group of a connected regular dessin is isomorphic to its monodromy group.

**Proof:**
For the whole proof, fix a hyperedge $$e \in E$$.
Let $$g$$ be an element of the monodromy group, which takes $$e$$ to the hyperedge $$g.e$$.
The action of the automorphism group on hyperedges is free (by a previous property) and transitive (by regularity), so there is a unique automorphism $$\alpha_e(g)$$ satisfying $$ \alpha_e(g)(g.e) = e $$.

We show that the map $$\alpha_e : g \mapsto \alpha_e(g)$$ is a group isomorphism:
- **$$\alpha_e$$ is a group morphism:**
  Let $$g, g'$$ be elements of the monodromy group.
  Then the automorphism $\alpha_e(g) \alpha_e(g')$ satisfies:

  $$
    \alpha_e(g) \alpha_e(g') (gg'.e) = \alpha_e(g) (g. \alpha_e(g') (g'.e)) = \alpha_e(g) (g.e) = e
  $$

  By construction, this means that $$\alpha_e(g) \alpha_e(g') = \alpha_e(gg')$$.
- **$$\alpha_e$$ is injective:**
  Assume $$\alpha_e(g) = 1$$.
  By definition, we have $$g.e = e$$.
  Let $$e' \in E$$.
  By regularity, there is an automorphism $$\beta$$ such that $$\beta(e) = e'$$.
  We have $$g.e' = g.\beta(e) = \beta(g.e) = \beta(e) = e'$$.
  So $$g \in \Sym_E$$ is the trivial permutation.
- **$$\alpha_e$$ is surjective:**
  Let $$\beta$$ be an automorphism.
  By connectedness, there is an element $$g$$ of the monodromy group such that $$ g.\beta(e) = e $$.
  We then have $$\beta(g.e)=e$$ and thus $$\beta = \alpha_e(g)$$ by definition.

 ■

-----

**Proposition:**
A connected dessin is regular if and only if its monodromy group acts freely on the set of its hyperedges.

**Proof:**
As we have seen, the monodromy group of a regular connected dessin is isomorphic to its automorphism group, and thus acts freely on hyperedges.

Conversely, assume the action of the monodromy group on the set of its hyperedges is free (recall that it is transitive by connectedness).
Let $$e \in E$$ be an hyperedge.
To every automorphism $$\alpha$$, one associates the unique element $$g_e(\alpha)$$ of the monodromy group satisfying $$g_e(\alpha).e = \alpha^{-1}(e)$$.
- **$$g_e$$ is a group morphism:**
  Let $$\alpha, \alpha'$$ be automorphisms.
  Then:

  $$ g_e(\alpha).g_e(\alpha').e = g_e(\alpha).(\alpha')^{-1}(e) = (\alpha')^{-1}(g_e(\alpha).e) = (\alpha')^{-1}(\alpha^{-1}(e)) = (\alpha \alpha')^{-1}(e) $$

  and thus $$g_e(\alpha \alpha') = g_e(\alpha) g_e(\alpha')$$ by freeness.
- **$$g_e$$ is injective:**
  Assume $$g_e(\alpha)=1$$, i.e. $$\alpha(e) = e$$.
  By connectedness, for every hyperedge $$e' \in E$$ there is an element $$g$$ of the monodromy group such that $$e'=g.e$$, and then $$\alpha(e')=\alpha(g.e)=g.\alpha(e)=g.e=e'$$.
  So $$\alpha$$ fixes every hyperedge, and is therefore the trivial automorphism.
- **$$g_e$$ is surjective:**
  Let $$g$$ be an element of the monodromy group.
  We define the automorphism $$\beta_g$$ in the following way:
  - If $$e' \in E$$ is a hyperedge, written as $$e' = h.e$$, then $$\beta_g(e') = hg.e$$
  - If $$v \in V_i$$ is a vertex, and $$v = s_i(e')$$, then $$\beta_g(v) = s_i(\beta_g(e'))$$.

  We let the reader check that this definition is meaningful.
  Notice that $$\beta_g(e) = g.e$$ and thus $$g_e(\beta_g^{-1}) = g$$.
  Therefore the morphism $$g_e$$ is surjective.

Thus $$g_e$$ is a group isomorphism between the monodromy group and the automorphism group.
Since the monodromy group acts transitively on the set of hyperedges (by connectedness), the dessin is regular.
 ■

-----

In a regular dessin, the number of hyperedges is equal to the order of the monodromy group or, equivalently, to the order of the automorphism group.
Any equality between two of these three integers implies regularity.

#### regular closure

Consider a connected dessin $$\D = (V_i, E, s_i)$$ and denote its monodromy group by $$G$$.

**Proposition:**
There exists a regular dessin $$\hat{\D}$$ with a morphism to $$\D$$, minimal in the following sense: every morphism from a regular dessin to $$\D$$ factorizes through $$\hat{\D}$$, and unique up to isomorphism.
Moreover, the monodromy group (and thus the automorphism group) of $$\hat{\D}$$ is isomorphic to $$G$$.

This result can be deduced from the existence of the Galois closure for extensions of $$\C(T)$$ (using Riemann's existence theorem to relate these extensions to dessins).
However, we give a direct construction:

**Proof:**
First let $$\hat E = G$$.

Let $$\hat V_i$$ be the set of right classes of $$G$$ modulo $$\gen{\sigma_i}$$.
Every element of $$G$$ belongs to exactly one of these right classes: this defines a map $$\hat s_i : \hat E \to \hat V_i$$.
For each $$v \in \hat V_i$$ (which is an orbit in $$G$$ under left multiplication by $$\sigma_i$$), a cyclical order on $$\hat s_i^{-1}(v) = v$$ is obtained as the order of appearance of elements under repeated multiplication by $$\sigma_i$$.
We have constructed a dessin $$\hat{\D} = (\hat V_i, \hat E, \hat s_i)$$.
Notice that the $$i$$-th monodromy element $$\hat\sigma_i$$ of the dessin $$\hat{\D}$$ is the permutation of $$G$$ induced by left multiplication by $$\sigma_i$$.
Therefore, the monodromy group of $$\hat{\D}$$ is isomorphic to $$G$$: the embedding $$G \to \Sym_{\hat E} = \Sym_G$$ is the left multiplication action.
Since the monodromy group has order $$\card{G} = \card{\hat E}$$, the dessin $$\hat{\D}$$ is regular.

Let us define a morphism of dessins $$\hat{\D} \to \D$$.
For this, fix an arbitrary hyperedge $$e \in E$$.
If $$g \in \hat E = G$$, let $$\Phi(g) = g.e$$.
This defines a surjection $$\Phi : \hat E \to E$$.
If $$v \in \hat V_i$$ is a right class of $$G$$ modulo $$\gen{\sigma_i}$$, then the hyperedges $$g.e$$ for $$g \in v$$ all have the same image $$\Sigma_i(v)$$ under $$s_i$$, because $$s_i(\sigma_i.e')=s_i(e')$$.
For all $$g \in G$$, we have $$\Sigma_i(\hat s_i(g)) = s_i(g.e) = s_i(\Phi(g))$$.
Moreover if $$v \in \hat V_i$$ and $$e \in (\hat s_i)^{-1}(v)$$, the element following $$e$$ in the cyclical order on $$(\hat s_i)^{-1}(v)$$ is $$\sigma_i e$$, and $$\Phi(\sigma_i e) = (\sigma_i e).g = \sigma_i.(e.g) = \sigma_i.\Phi(e)$$ is also the element following $$\Phi(e)$$ in the cyclical order on $$s_i^{-1}(\Sigma_i(v))$$.
We have defined a morphism $$\hat D \to D$$.

We let the reader check the minimality of $$\hat{\D}$$, from which uniqueness follows. ■

## faces and clean dessins

Consider a dessin $$\D$$, embedded in a compact oriented surface in a way that satisfies the constraints mentioned in the previous post (recall that all these embeddings are equivalent up to a direct homeomorphism of the surface).
This situation is always what we mean by an *embedded dessin*.

**Definition (faces):**
A *face* of $$\D$$ is a connected component of the complement of the embedded dessin.

All faces are homeomorphic to disks.

In what follows, a *segment* is the part of the boundary of an hyperedge that lies between two adjacent colors: if hyperedges are represented as $$n$$-gons, then segments are the edges of that $$n$$-gon.
When $$n=2$$, one must still consider that there are two segments: the confusion can be avoided by representing edges as "thick" digons.
We see segments as oriented: their orientation respects the order of colors $$1 \to 2 \to \ldots \to n \to 1$$ (when $$n=2$$, one segment is $$\circ \to \bullet$$ and the other one is $$\bullet \to \circ$$).
In this way, there is always a hyperedge on the right side of a segment, and a face on the left side of a segment.

Consider a given face and travel along its boundary in the positive direction (i.e. respect the cyclical order on colors $$1 \to 2 \to 3 \to \ldots \to n \to 1 \to \ldots$$).
Noting the order in which the segments that make up the boundary of the considered face appear, one obtains a cyclical order on the set of these segments.

**Definition (degree of a face):**
The *degree* of a face is the number of times that the full order of colors is repeated during a complete travel along the boundary of the face.
In other words, one meets in total $$nd$$ segments, where $$d$$ is the degree of the face.

Les coarêtes correspondent aux cycles dans la décomposition de $\sigma_{n+1}$, le degré donnant la taille du cycle.
Étant donné une hyperarête du dessin, elle a un unique sommet de couleur $n$ et un unique sommet de couleur $1$~: la coarête qui correspond à cette hyperarête (c'est-à-dire le cycle de $\sigma_{n+1}$ qui la contient) est celle bordée par le segment du $n$-gone qui joint ces deux sommets.\footnote{Ici, il y a une complication pour $n=2$ puisqu'on ne peut pas distinguer les deux côtés du digone par les couleurs de leurs sommets, dans ce cas, il faut se concentrer sur ce qui se passe à gauche quand on regarde dans la direction $\circ \to \bullet$.}

-----

**Example:**
Sur l'\cref{ex:proper}, il y a deux coarêtes, auxquelles on donne les noms de <<~coarête intérieure~>> (celle dont les sommets sont $r$, $b$ et $v'$) et de <<~coarête extérieure~>> (celle qui se prolonge hors de la figure).
Revenons à l'\cref{ex:proper}.
Dans le cas de la coarête extérieure (de degré $3$)~:
\[\begin{tikzcd}[ampersand replacement=\&]
    \& r \& v \& {b'} \\
    b \&\&\&\& {r'} \\
    v \& {r'} \& {b'} \& {v'}
    \arrow["{(1)}", from=1-2, to=1-3]
    \arrow["{(4)}", from=1-3, to=1-4]
    \arrow["{(4)}", from=1-4, to=2-5]
    \arrow["{(3)}", from=2-5, to=3-4]
    \arrow["{(2)}", from=3-4, to=3-3]
    \arrow["{(3)}", from=3-3, to=3-2]
    \arrow["{(4)}", from=3-2, to=3-1]
    \arrow["{(1)}", from=3-1, to=2-1]
    \arrow["{(2)}", from=2-1, to=1-2]
\end{tikzcd}\]
et dans le cas de la coarête intérieure (de degré $1$)~:% https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsMyxbMCwwLCJyIl0sWzEsMSwidiciXSxbMCwxLCJiIl0sWzAsMSwiKDIpIl0sWzEsMiwiKDMpIl0sWzIsMCwiKDEpIl1d
\[\begin{tikzcd}[ampersand replacement=\&]
    r \\
    b \& {v'}
    \arrow["{(2)}", from=1-1, to=2-2]
    \arrow["{(3)}", from=2-2, to=2-1]
    \arrow["{(1)}", from=2-1, to=1-1]
\end{tikzcd}\]

Dans l'exemple, il s'agit des segments $b \to r$~: la coarête extérieure correspond aux hyperarêtes $2$, $4$, $3$ (dans cet ordre) et la coarête intérieure à l'hyperarête $1$.

#### clean dessins

**Definition (clean dessin):**
An $$n$$-dessin $$\mathcal{D}$$ is *clean* if its $$(n+1)$$-th monodromy element $$\sigma_{n+1}$$ is trivial.

De la description de $\sigma_{n+1}$ à partir des coarêtes d'un dessin $\D$, on déduit immédiatement:

**Corollaire:**
Étant donné bon plongement d'un dessin $\D$ sur une surface de Riemann, les propriétés suivantes sont équivalentes:
- $\D$ est beau.
- Le revêtement de $\PC$ correspondant à $\D$ est non-ramifié en $t_{n+1}$.
- $\D$ possède autant de coarêtes que d'hyperarêtes
- Toutes les coarêtes de $\D$ sont de degré $1$ (entourées d'exactement un sommet de chaque couleur).

Dans le cas d'un beau dessin, on peut intervertir le rôle des hyperarêtes et des coarêtes afin d'obtenir un autre dessin, <<~dual~>> en un certain sens, qui donne lieu à un revêtement isomorphe.
Cela revient simplement à échanger les couleurs jaune et blanc dans l'image ci-dessous (le point $t_{n+1}$ n'étant pas ramifié, le complémentaire du $n$-gone est un aussi bon candidat que le $n$-gone lui-même, à cela près que l'ordre cyclique sur les couleurs lors du parcours du bord est inversé)~:

$$\todo{dualitepokeball.png}$$

#### computing the genus

Un bon plongement d'un dessin $\D$ sur une surface décrit une décomposition cellulaire de cette surface~:
- Les sommets de cette décomposition sont les sommets du dessin, qui sont au nombre de $\sum \card{V_i}$.
- Les $1$-cellules de cette décomposition sont au nombre de $n\card{E}$, chaque hyperarête du dessin ayant $n$ côtés.
- Les faces de cette décomposition sont les hyperarêtes et les coarêtes du dessin.
  En notant $\kappa$ le nombre de coarêtes, il y a donc $\kappa + \card{E}$ faces.

On en déduit que la caractéristique d'Euler de la surface de Riemann sur laquelle le dessin est plongé est~:

$$
    \sum \card{V_i} + (1-n) \card{E} + \kappa
$$

et le genre de cette surface est alors~:

$$
    1 - \frac{1}{2} \left(
        \sum \card{V_i} + (1-n) \card{E} + \kappa
    \right).
$$

Dans le cas particulier des beaux dessins, on a $$\kappa = \card{E}$$, et le genre est alors donné par~:

$$
    1 - \frac{1}{2} \left(
        \sum \card{V_i} + (2-n) \card{E}
    \right).
$$

**Example:**
Dans le cas de l'\cref{ex:proper}, on obtient comme genre~:

$$
    1 - \frac{1}{2} \left(
        6 + (1-3) \times 4 + 2
    \right) = 1
$$

ce qui traduit le fait que l'espace total du revêtement associé soit un tore.

-----

**Proposition:**
Les seuls beaux dessins d'enfants connexes sont ceux de la forme suivante~:
$$\todo{beauxdesenf.png}$$
où le nombre d'arêtes est un certain entier $\geq 1$.

**Proof:**
Soit un tel dessin, plongé sur une surface.
Le genre $1-\frac{1}{2} \sum \card{V_i}$ de la surface est positif, donc le dessin a au plus $2$ sommets, soit un sommet blanc et un sommet noir.
Le résultat suit.

#### cleaning dessins

En ajoutant une couleur (placée à la fin), et un sommet de cette couleur pour chaque coarête, on peut transformer tout $n$-dessin en un beau $(n+1)$-dessin.
L'ordre cyclique d'apparition des hyperarêtes autour d'une coarête donnée est l'ordre d'apparition, au cours du parcours dans le sens des aiguilles d'une montre du bord de la coarête, des côtés des hyperarêtes du type $n \to 1$.
En termes d'éléments de monodromie, cela revient simplement à associer au $n$-uplet $(g_1,\ldots, g_n)$ le $n+1$-uplet $(g_1,\ldots,g_n,(g_1 \cdots g_n)^{-1})$.

Traitons un exemple en embellissant le dessin d'enfants suivant~:

$$\todo{embell1.png}$$

Il y a cinq coarêtes (faces).
On rajoute un sommet d'une nouvelle couleur dans chaque face~:

$$\todo{embell2.png}$$

Puis on étend les hyperarêtes existantes en les reliant à ces nouveaux sommets en fonction de la face qui est en contact avec le bord gauche d'une hyperarête $\circ \to \bullet$~:

$$\todo{embell3.png}$$

L'opération d'embellissement définit une équivalence de catégorie entre la catégorie des $n$-dessins et celle des beaux $(n+1)$-dessins.

-----

In the next blog post, we will discuss $$\todo{}$$.
